There you go.
Yeah.
Okay.
The tape is running.
No, I appreciate your asking.
Because really, you have to.
I wouldn't do it if you didn't want me to.
You're having your coffee and I'm just finishing my bagel.
Oh, I was going to accuse me of being late.
I was going to tell you what I've done since I've been up.
Well, what have you done since you've been up?
Huh?
What have you done?
Anything interesting?
Oh, walked the dog, cleaned out the refrigerator.
Mm-hmm.
unpacked some stuff I brought up from New York and made a shopping list because I have a friend coming down from Montreal.
Oh, that sounds like fun.
For a weekend.
I'll be here when Stanley... I live with a man named Stanley Leff, L-E-F-F.
We've been together for almost 10 years now, so maybe that was already true the last time I talked to you.
We spoke the last time after Emily...
Uh-huh.
Well, then it wasn't true.
And then another woman, when I was at the Worcester paper, came in and interviewed you.
Uh-huh.
Okay.
And I think it was for August, but I'm not sure.
But that's 83, right?
Um, MLM was 80.
Yeah, MLM was... Oh, my God.
Don't tell me that.
It is time goes.
So then I guess it was August that you talked to Dolores.
Anyway, this is quite a change of pace for you, I guess.
I guess we can start...
easily.
Did you kind of conceive of this as a change of pace?
No, I never think that way.
Let's see, in 1980, let's see, August was 83, I meant to write about Mata Hari, and I wrote a book instead called His Little Women, but in the interim, I had a very serious
illness that people are are uh even doctors disagree about but i lost my short-term memory and went on a computer and wrote um that was when i wrote his little women in which some people feel you can see the the tracks of my memory loss i haven't had the courage to go back and read it yet but at any rate that came out it was a great disappointment in um
commercially at the very least.
As I say, I haven't re-read it yet, so I don't know what I think of it.
And then... You say you haven't read it yet, or you haven't read it at all?
No, that's not.
I read the book hundreds of times.
I'm just kidding.
And then Stanley and I went off to Italy.
I had never been to Italy.
I'm sort of a non-traveler.
I've been places where my publishers have sent me tickets to go.
I mean, I'm a traveler within the United States, but I don't like being where I don't have a language.
I don't have the travel impulse, whatever it is, intellectual curiosity.
Anyway, we went to Italy, and I had finished His Little Women, and we went to Venice.
This was the second place we were in.
And late one afternoon, when we'd been there two or three days, Stanley...
took a nap and I sat down at the window and I there was a notebook nearby and I started writing a story that turned into a long story called 116th Street Jenny about a young woman from an academic family in Manhattan who two older an older brother and sister both of them were academics and from her earliest days she's huddling in the kitchen with with the cooks and eventually she goes to Italy and
as a babysitter, and has an affair with a man tending the vineyards of the family she's working for.
And then she comes home, and there's some more to the story, but I thought it was finished, and what I meant to write was a book, a sequel to August, because I was interested in the girls making the transition from the analytic to the
to the politics.
She goes off to Washington at the end of August.
And I wanted to take her through Washington a bit.
Was this going to be with the same characters?
Well, the same main character, Don.
And I sat down to write, and what came out instead was a continuation of this story I'd written, 116th Street, Jenny.
Hmm.
which she comes back to the States, isn't happy here, goes back to Italy, gets pregnant by this guy, marries him and cooks there for some years.
And that's what happened.
That's what came out.
You don't always control.
I don't believe in controlling what enters my computer.
I believe in editing it after it's in there.
But I don't believe that fiction writers should
control too tightly what comes out because I think, I mean, August was not supposed to be a book about a psychoanalysis.
It was supposed to be about a libel suit.
And this girl in analysis took over the book instead of the analyst and the guy who was being sued taking over the book.
This is a lighter treatment for you, though, this book.
I mean, certainly compared to what you've done in the past.
Well, people keep saying that.
You know, to me, the stuff with the kid is pretty heavy.
Painful business.
You know, they're sort of the two...
It seems there's the food, which is in the kitchen, and she can control it and pretty much do what she wants with it and have it come out okay.
And the kids are much less subject to control, much less likely to do what you want them to do in this day and age, certainly.
And the kid, of course, has another story altogether.
Yeah.
Which is true.
I mean, the title of the book could be food.
It's not.
I mean, it's Olivia, right?
That's right.
And as a matter of fact, I fought that cover with the food on it because I felt it didn't represent the book accurately.
Really?
So you didn't want this bagel and the zucchini and the corn?
It's very pretty.
It is pretty.
And it draws people, but I thought it misrepresented the book.
I wanted to have...
A picture, actually, the picture I had in mind at both, the picture I wanted was, you remember in the book the story about the statue, the statues of the naked boys?
And they're all sort of holding this big tray or bowl.
So I wanted that statue with maybe some spaghetti on top.
That would have been cute.
Yeah.
They tried it.
They didn't feel it worked.
Well, I can see marketing.
Now, when you say they tried it, what do you mean?
They actually go to a test group.
Well, I have, you know, I have some control.
And so I said, I don't like this.
I wanted a different cover.
And they played with different ones and everyone felt they didn't work.
They weren't graphically as appealing.
You see, people are interested in food, though.
I mean, as you just used it, as you just, I mean, not necessarily used it in the book, but as you just expressed it, food certainly is a metaphor, isn't it?
It's everything.
It's there in our daily lives.
It cannot be eliminated.
It can be pleasurable.
It can be fraught with all kinds of
complications, limitations, discipline from self and others.
There's really nothing like it.
Even shelter doesn't do it.
But I mean, as you just expressed it, food, when she goes into the kitchen, she's in control.
And if she follows her... Well, initially what she is, initially when she goes into the kitchen, what she is is with someone who loves her, who she doesn't feel unwelcome.
She feels like part of it, and she can do something.
From the time kids are very little, there are some things they can do in the kitchen if their mothers or whoever is inclined to let them.
And with her family, she felt not quite a part of it, whereas she felt welcome in the kitchen with a housekeeper.
There's one section there where you actually say that food has almost taken the place of sex in many contemporary lives, right?
Right.
Well, the whole obsessive talk, you know, and the media filler was sex for a while.
And I would say, you know, somewhere from the 70s, really, we all know went from 75 to 85.
And somewhere in there between diseases and it was the end of a fantasy.
It wasn't just that sex involvement.
diseases it was that there were other there were other difficulties that came from living a life centered around it and um people weren't about to give up the idea of having anything that was so much you know great fun you say that when you start a novel you really are you let it develop the way it and it's just being developed and then and then the re the revision phase is where you kind of shape it more to uh
to where you think it ought to be, right?
Well, or shape it at the very least.
In other words, if August... I mean, August began as the story of a libel suit.
And this guy, Vincent, from one of my early books, actually, consults this analyst for help.
He's being sued by a woman he once lived with, a rather awful woman who was a hooker, actually, and he took care of her kid.
And one of the real lunatic feminists grabs hold of him, a lawyer...
and gets this woman to sue him over the book, and he doesn't know what to do, and he consults this analyst, Lulu Scheinfeld, and falls in love with her.
And I wrote about 100, I think it was 117 pages of that, if I remember correctly.
And nothing happened.
It wasn't going anyplace.
The libel, nothing was coming.
So I said, well, I'll show Lulu at work because the work is usually the most interesting part of people.
And I literally, I mean, I remember this so distinctly with all my memory stuff that I've had.
I sat down.
I was then renting.
I guess I was still in my second marriage.
We were renting a house on the tip of East Hampton on the water that's
this rickety old cottage, but it was with wonderful views.
And I made my coffee, and I got my previous day's New York Times, which is the way I did it there, because I couldn't, it was too far to town for the current day.
And I sat down, and I put aside the newspaper and started writing this
This girl entered Lulu's office and took over the book, quite literally.
She started talking, and I wrote for 200 pages.
Later on, I shaped it.
Later on, I made alternate chapters where one is of the analyst's own life, which is where it began, and the other was Dawn's life in the office, you know, showing, for one thing, the difference in how much she could...
and how she could deal with patients and how she dealt with her own life.
Where do these characters come from, do you figure?
Well, they're all stored in my unconscious.
I mean, I see similarities that other people don't see.
You know, when people start this business of my own life, I say the seeds of my own life are what blossoms in a book, if not the life itself.
The seeds of people.
My craziest book in a way, Attachments, I don't know if you ever read about, is about women friends who marry Siamese twins.
And that's the book my best friend hates.
She can't read it at all because she sees me in there so much.
So it's obviously, we're not talking about the events of one's life precisely, but about something else.
The animating spirit, the conflicts.
Now, this one had to be narrated, too, didn't it?
This particular book.
As opposed to... Well, as opposed to, you know, a different voice.
I mean, the voice was so important here.
The voice of the narrator.
It came out... It began that way.
The story, which was called 116th Street Jenny, it was published in Modern American Fiction.
That...
It began with her voice.
It came out naturally that way the first time.
It doesn't always happen, obviously.
And it's decidedly a contemporary story, too.
It would be awfully hard.
I mean, changing lives.
Here's a woman who left her daughter.
I mean, that is almost an unforgivable thing at another time, isn't it?
Yeah, sure.
It's almost unforgivable.
It's almost unforgivable, actually.
It's a very extreme act.
She had to feel...
that she was utterly superfluous to the kid to do it.
But, and I think it's possible by the circumstances as well.
I mean, you have this Italian father, you know, and a rigid Catholic and also on his own turf.
So, I mean, there are circumstances.
He's not a rigid, you know, he's a Catholic when it's in his best interest.
When it's in his interest and, you know, he's deeply Catholic in some way, but he certainly is not.
what one would call a religious man, a legitimately religious man.
And, of course, you certainly do raise issues of anti-Semitism, and there are many other contemporary themes as well in here.
Well, I've been surprised that no one has talked about the abortion stuff.
I don't know.
To me, the central issue of the book is whether this girl...
This pregnant 16-year-old is going to have a baby, or she's this highly academic kid who has no desire in the world to take care of anybody else, and she gets pregnant.
And to me, the issue of how that will work out is the central issue of the book.
You know, I'm looking again through the book here as we speak, and of course you say you don't want it to be perceived as a food book.
No, I don't mind how it's perceived as long as it sells, but I hope when people read it, they'll see that.
All right, I interrupted you.
You go ahead.
No, but I'm just reading the very first sentence.
It was my intention that this memoir be a lighthearted kitchen romance.
My life and food, you know.
Right.
But that's her intention, Nick.
That's right.
You know.
But how many people never read me on the first page before they start writing their reviews, you know, or throwing up their jacket art, you know.
Yeah.
Right.
You might say that.
You certainly bring a New York sensibility to what you write, don't you?
Yeah, I really do.
It doesn't explain why Boston's, I think, my best town in the whole country for selling books, but... Is that right?
Yeah.
Maybe Boston people read about... Bostonians read about...
the New York sensibility like foreign tourists reading about going to I know I find that I try to be especially since I've got newspapers on both coasts and in the middle though you really don't want to focus on
writers from one region, but you can't help it.
I mean, you know, when Grace Paley comes around, you've got to do Grace Paley, regardless of where she's from, right?
So New York, any place, once it gets the reputation for being the center of action, draws people.
That's right.
Everybody wasn't born in New York City, but they go there, you know.
In fact, most of us, one of my kids now lives in California, the other in Framingham.
Right up here.
Yeah.
And he went to school in Boston and has never won.
And my best friend, all three of her kids stayed in Boston.
The New York kids who go to Boston don't want to come back.
And that's a tough city to leave.
I certainly in my younger days had opportunities to go to much larger newspapers.
Mm-hmm.
But who wants to leave here?
I love it up here.
They have many of New York's virtues without some of the difficulties.
But let me say also, I love New York.
You won't find any Boston people who will admit to that foolishly, but it is the greatest city.
But just to go back, I mean, in the last couple of months, Paley, Dr. Rowe, even Kotswinkle's new book is set in New York, which is crazy.
It's a fun book.
Is the doctor wonderful?
I can't read fiction when I'm working.
He got very respectful.
I liked it.
I really did.
I just like everything he writes.
He's a really wonderful writer.
And I have a hard time not liking anything that he does.
Yeah, I feel the same way.
When he gives a speech, I'll listen.
I just hope he gets that cable thing going.
Remember, he was going to get involved in a 24-hour cable.
Also, let's talk about the mother-daughter.
I mean, there is a whole, I hesitate to use the word genre, but there certainly is a generation of mother-daughter books, explorations.
Tell me what you thought you might bring to the debate here.
Take it anywhere you want.
I'm sorry, what?
I said, when you frame it that way, I want to hang up.
Don't hang up.
It drives me wild.
Take it anywhere you want, is what I said.
Well, one of the things that's true is that the early 70s, the first Ms.
Magazine flourish, you know.
The mother-daughter relationship, which had been underplayed, was suddenly romanticized and suddenly, you know, nobody needed men, which is sort of funny, and mother-daughter is the only thing in the whole world that counts.
Well, it's certainly the primary relationship in one's early years, and then hopefully one moves away some, and then if things go well, as...
Later, after adolescence, one becomes friends again, you know.
Two becomes friends.
At any rate, I think that, you know, when politics enters personal relations, there are always difficulties.
And while...
doubtless some good good things came out of it a lot of how shall we say it a lot of it was baloney um uh it's very much more complex than that um if if only because i mean it has to be in fact uh kids have to go through adolescence and rebel and then grow up that's you know the ideal although it's hellish to live through uh
But in this case, you know, the relation was infinitely complicated by what the father did with the daughter.
And then there was, I guess, the cultural difference made it harder because there is that extraordinarily...
idealized relation between, I think, between many Italian fathers and daughters.
And who knows?
I don't want to... Can I just eliminate that whole sentence?
I don't want to sound as though I think I'm an authority on Italian fathers and daughters.
Let's just talk about Angelo, who...
in a sense, by marrying a foreigner, which he does as well.
It's not just Carolyn who marries a foreigner.
So in a sense, by marrying a foreigner, he leaves himself needing that elementary communication that comes when people come from a common culture.
And so he needs to, you know, the love that he feels for
This lively American girl, before they marry, gets transferred in a way that probably doesn't do either of them any good.
You know, it's very clear that the kid would have been better off if the father had let her grow up, let her... She would have turned against her mother maybe anyway, some, but there would have been cultural limitations.
And they would have stayed together and...
And the kid might have outgrown that Oedipal attachment.
As it is, she's completely mired in it.
Yeah.
She's not the most...
What's the word?
I'm sympathetic of girls.
Well, she's a pain in the ass.
She's a total pain in the ass, isn't she?
Yeah, she really is.
And I wonder, is this endemic to the species of teenage girls?
I have two daughters, by the way.
Oh, you do?
They're 13 and 11, and they're wonderful.
Right.
But let's just, you know.
It's getting rough.
You know, they get older, and every day they get a little older.
Yeah, yeah.
Well.
I've seen, I know one family where there are four daughters, and there's been somewhat different treatment.
Basically, the mother has been a loving mother most of the time, and never completely unloving.
I can get into trouble with this one.
All right, you will leave out any specifics that might cast them.
And anyway, the point is that all four girls, the youngest is now a teenager.
And all four of them, two or three of them were quite reasonable human beings, and then they had adolescence, and then it was hell.
Just hell.
The ones who are most steadily loved.
Are there special pressures today, or is this basically human nature, do you suppose?
Today meaning, you know, the time in which we live.
You know, today is in another era.
For one thing, a lot of girls were married by the time they were 15, 16 years old.
Isn't that funny?
We were out.
It was for dinner.
It was my daughter's birthday the other day.
My mother, we went out and she said, you know, my wife, she said, well, I was much older than Barbara here when I got married.
You know, 18 or whatever it was.
And she was pregnant with my brother.
I was 19 the first time I got married.
And what's remarkable to me now is that I was still living at home then.
And one of the things that goes on that's so wild these days is that the kids never...
Never grow up.
They act like grownups in some ways much earlier.
Then they never leave.
The kids come home.
If they were away from home for college, whatever, then they come home and live for a while.
Well, it's less expensive these days, too, probably.
I mean, there aren't any number of other factors that come into play, I guess.
Right.
You don't see this as a satire in any way, do you?
On whom?
No, I mean not on whom.
I mean the book in general, on things.
I mean, I don't think that there's any element of satire in here.
Well, I know I tried to be funny, but I don't think of it as satire.
No, I don't either.
I just saw it someplace.
Where does the humor come from?
Does this kind of generate itself?
Do you want my best friend's phone number?
Should we give you my...
Credentials about being, I mean, you know, there's humor in my other book.
Attachments is a funny book.
His Little Women has a lot of funny stuff in it.
The initial stuff about Los Angeles and Hollywood is so funny that nobody would talk to me there when it was published.
What else?
I mean, Goodbye.
Humor stems, you know, from the situation.
The bar isn't very funny for the obvious reasons.
All right, but it does have to be organic, as they say.
I guess it has to generate itself from the situation.
Yeah, well, I'm a Bronx Jew, you know, funny sometimes.
So what's coming next?
Have you thought about that at all?
Oh, indeed.
Well, there are two things going on.
And it's a coincidence that they both related to Emmeline.
My hometown, you know.
I'm from Lowell.
Lowell.
I'd forgotten that.
I think maybe I knew it.
An opera is being made of Emmeline.
In fact, the Lowell Son takes my column, by the way.
Oh, good.
It's going to be an opera.
It's going to be performed in Santa Fe in 1996.
No kidding.
Yep.
All the elements of the plot are intact?
Yes.
The composer's name is Tobias Picker.
How do you spell Picker?
P-I-C-K-E-R.
Okay.
And he saw a PBS thing about Emmeline and got interested in it and mentioned it to a friend who knew me and we got together.
And Tobias, he's modern but melodic composer.
his music is and um the libretto is being written by a poet named Francis J.D.
McClatchy he's well known and maybe coincidentally um my next book is going to be about his son ah uh
sequel so to speak yeah i i use that word but i hate it but there's no other word listen joe heller can do a sequel to catch 22 33 years after the fact i'm sorry what in fact i don't think he could uh i mean i think it's a did that come out hey i just got the proofs i just got i'm interviewing him in a couple weeks i'm going up to vermont next week to see john irving
And that's going to be, I just got that book, and this is getting terrible reviews.
He's written a couple, some wonderful books.
He's written a really awful one.
The only one I ever reviewed was Hotel New Hampshire, which was just dead garbage.
It was GARP, you know, revisited.
Yes, exactly, and it didn't have any internal life to it.
And I can't even remember what it was about, to tell you the truth, except there was a stuff there.
It was the same, no, revisited.
It was all the same people, sort of recycled.
Yeah, in fact, I reviewed it myself, and I didn't review Garb.
Somebody else did it for me then.
Garb was wonderful.
Garb was great.
Mostly wonderful.
And there were a couple of others.
Since my memory loss, I haven't read much fiction, but Cider House Rules is supposed to be wonderful.
Yeah, it was all in Meany or something.
I'm going to spend the next week just getting ready for this, because...
I did an interview with Tim O'Brien a couple weeks ago, and he's friendly, and he had a very interesting observation.
He said this is a guy that was perceived as a literary writer.
John Irving.
You know, prior to GARP.
Yeah, he's a storyteller.
But Iowa Writers Workshop, the whole thing.
And then all of a sudden he has this extraordinary success.
And he feels that it actually took away from, he said, there are some really magical parts of garb that got lost in this whole commercial thing.
You know, this wave that washed over him.
It's a very interesting observation.
I'm simplifying it here.
In fact, I'm going to look back at O'Brien's.
As someone who's not classified as a literary writer, I resent that distinction.
You might talk about that.
I think there are better writers and worse ones.
I think that a writer who is
A decent writer is some degree of literary, you know.
I mean, literature means what?
What does it mean?
Fiction, doesn't it?
I guess.
I haven't looked it up in the dictionary.
But I think that...
I don't know, it looks like a way of dividing up people on bookshelves.
I'm always amused when you buy a VCR and the guy says, now you've got to read the literature on this, you know.
Yes.
I look around, you know.
He means the owner's manual, you know.
It's a very loosely defined word, isn't it?
No one actually, the Japanese instructions we're getting now, no one even tries to buy that.
Oh, God, I mean, they're funny.
They're amazing.
There's a fortune to be made for technical writers who can take these things and make them really accessible.
I really believe that.
They're really trying now, but it's not working.
It's odd.
They will not use American proofreaders or editors.
I can't remember what it was we bought recently, but it's a bit of a joke.
Well, I remember when I was in the service way back,
um not on my ship but another ship they these cruise books that we used to produce you know they're like yearbooks only they were cruise books and most of them went to these japanese firms and in this particular case not one of these guys could read english and they put in the you know they did gorgeous color reproduction but they had these